The algorithms that you've learned thus far have been uninformed.
Their search was sprawled in all directions because they
lacked any information regarding the whereabouts of the goal.
The last search algorithm that you will learn in this lesson
and the mightiest of them all, this A* Search.
A* Search is an informed search.
This means that it takes into account information about
the goal's location as it goes about its search.
A Desso by using something called a heuristic function.
A heuristic function, h of n,
represents the distance from a node to the goal.
H of n is only an estimate of the distance,
as the only way to know the true distance would be to traverse the graph.
However, even an estimate is
beneficial as it steers a search in the appropriate direction.
A* uses more than just a heuristic function in its search strategy.
It also takes into account the path cost,
g of n. A* chooses the pass that
minimize the sum of the path cost and the heuristic function.
The sum is denoted f of n. By doing so,
it accomplishes two things at once,
minimizing g of n favors shorter paths and
minimizing h of n favors paths in the direction of the goal.
A* searches for the shortest path in the direction of the goal.
Let's go back to our graph to see this in action.
The objective we have is to find the shortest path from node E
to node K. Let's try to search this graph once more,
this time with the help of the heuristic to guide the algorithm to the goal.
For two-dimensional graph like this one,
a valid heuristic would be the Euclidean distance from a node to the goal.
That is the distance as the crow flies.
As you see here,
nodes close to the goal have a low heuristic value,
and nodes further away from the goal have a higher heuristic value.
The goal itself has a heuristic of zero.
If we wanted to calculate f of n for a node,
we would add the path cost,
g of n, to the heuristic,
h of n. For instance,
this node would have a value of two plus five,
which is seven, and this node,
a value of five plus eight, which is 13.
Now, let's go through the algorithm steps.
Just like in uniform cost search,
we will be using a priority queue for the frontier.
For A* Search, we will order it by f of n. At the start,
we have four nodes and their corresponding paths on the frontier.
The path to node G has the lowest f of n,
so we will explore it first.
As new nodes are added to the frontier,
they are inserted into the appropriate location in
the priority queue based on f of n. Once again,
if a shorter route is found to a node,
the path and the value of f of n for that node will be updated.
You can see this happening with node I in this step.
The A* Search algorithm continues.
Unlike uniform cost search,
you can see that A* Search is directed towards the goal.
The nodes on the left hand side of the graph have not been explored.
However, A* will still explore what it believes
to be promising sections like the dead end at
node N. Here's another instance where nodes' path and f of n value are updated.
As a result, node J gets bumped up to the top of the frontier and explored next,
leading us straight to the goal.
Once again, the shortest path has been found with a total path cost of nine.
Note that A* Search took less steps to complete than Uniform Cost Search
as it used a heuristic value for each node to keep itself oriented toward the goal.